Documentation/Troubleshooting.md, before:

# Troubleshooting

In case of an error, you might find an answer of how to deal it here.

## Building SerenityOS

### CMake fails to configure the build because it's outdated

Ensure your CMake version is >= 3.16 with `cmake --version`. If your system doesn't provide a suitable
version of CMake, you can download a binary release from the [CMake website](https://cmake.org/download).

### QEMU is missing or is outdated

Ensure your [QEMU](https://www.qemu.org/) version is >= 5 with `qemu-system-i386 -version`. Otherwise,
install it. You can also build it using the `Toolchain/BuildQemu.sh` script.

### GCC is missing or is outdated

Ensure your gcc version is >= 12 with `gcc --version`. Otherwise, install it. If your gcc binary is not
called `gcc` you have to specify the names of your C and C++ compiler when you run cmake, e.g.
`cmake ../.. -GNinja -DCMAKE_C_COMPILER=gcc-12 -DCMAKE_CXX_COMPILER=g++-12`.

### Legacy renegotiation is disabled

Ensure your `/etc/ssl/openssl.cnf` file has the following options:

```console
[openssl_init]
ssl_conf = ssl_sect

[ssl_sect]
system_default = system_default_sect

[system_default_sect]
MinProtocol = TLSv1.2
CipherString = DEFAULT@SECLEVEL=1
Options = UnsafeLegacyRenegotiation
```

## Running SerenityOS

### The VM is really slow

On Linux, QEMU is significantly faster if it's able to use KVM. The run script will automatically enable KVM
if `/dev/kvm` exists and is readable+writable by the current user. On Windows, ensure that you have
WHPX acceleration enabled.

### Slow boot on HiDPI systems

On some Windows systems running with >100% scaling, the booting phase of Serenity might slow to a crawl. Changing the
zoom settings of the QEMU window will speed up the emulation, but you'll have to squint harder to read the smaller display.

The default display backend (`SERENITY_QEMU_DISPLAY_BACKEND=sdl,gl=off`) does _not_ have this problem. If you're
running into this problem, make sure you haven't changed the QEMU display backend.

A quick workaround is opening the properties of the QEMU executable at `C:\Program Files\qemu\qemu-system-x86_64.exe`, and
in the Compatibility tab changing the DPI settings to force the scaling to be performed by the System, by changing the
setting at at the bottom of the window. The QEMU window will now render at normal size while retaining acceptable emulation speeds.

This is being tracked as issue [#7657](https://github.com/SerenityOS/serenity/issues/7657).

### Boot fails with "Error: Kernel Image too big for memory slot. Halting!"

This means the kernel is too large again. Contact us on the discord server or open a GitHub Issue about it.
You might want to revert latest changes in tree to see if that solves the problem temporarily.

### Boot fails with "Your computer does not support long mode (64-bit mode). Halting!"

Either your machine (if you try to boot on bare metal) is very old, thus it's not supporting x86_64
extensions, or you try to use VirtualBox without using a x64 virtualization mode or you try to use
`qemu-system-i386` which doesn't support x86_64 extensions too.

### Boot fails with "Your computer does not support PAE. Halting!"

- If booting on bare metal, your CPU is too old to boot Serenity.
- If you're using VirtualBox, you need to enable PAE/NX. Check the instructions [here.](VirtualBox.md)
- If you're using QEMU, the [CPU model configuration](https://qemu-project.gitlab.io/qemu/system/qemu-cpu-models.html) is not exposing PAE.

### Boot fails with "KVM doesn't support guest debugging"
- Update your host kernel to at least version `5.10`. This is the oldest kernel which properly supports the required KVM capability `KVM_CAP_SET_GUEST_DEBUG` (see corresponding [kernel commit](https://github.com/torvalds/linux/commit/b9b2782cd5)).
- Make sure that your distro has the qemu debug feature actually enabled (the corresponding check is [here](https://gitlab.com/qemu-project/qemu/-/blob/222059a0fccf4af3be776fe35a5ea2d6a68f9a0b/accel/kvm/kvm-all.c#L2540)). 
- Or, disable KVM debugging by setting this env var when running serenity: `SERENITY_DISABLE_GDB_SOCKET=1`

Commit message:

Documentation: Hide `Meta/serenity.sh rebuild-toolchain`
Unless a new toolchain update has been merged, users should not need to
rebuild their toolchain. Yet, the first thing they see in the build
documentation is to run `Meta/serenity.sh rebuild-toolchain`, which
might incorrectly lead them to use it whenever they encounter an error.
This is a waste of time and causes frustration.

Move any mentions of this option to `Troubleshooting.md` and add a note
to `BuildInstructions.md` about the toolchain build being a one-time
endeavor.

Documentation/Troubleshooting.md, after:

# Troubleshooting

In case of an error, you might find an answer of how to deal it here.

## Building SerenityOS

### CMake fails to configure the build because it's outdated

Ensure your CMake version is >= 3.16 with `cmake --version`. If your system doesn't provide a suitable
version of CMake, you can download a binary release from the [CMake website](https://cmake.org/download).

### QEMU is missing or is outdated

Ensure your [QEMU](https://www.qemu.org/) version is >= 5 with `qemu-system-i386 -version`. Otherwise,
install it. You can also build it using the `Toolchain/BuildQemu.sh` script.

### The toolchain is outdated

We strive to use the latest compilers and build tools to ensure the best developer experience; so every
few months, the toolchain needs to be updated. When such an update is due, an error like the following
will be printed during the build:

```
CMake Error at CMakeLists.txt:28 (message):
  GNU version (13.1.0) does not match expected compiler version (13.2.0).

  Please rebuild the GNU Toolchain
```

Or like this one:

```
Your toolchain has an old version of binutils installed.
    installed version: "GNU ld (GNU Binutils) 2.40"
    expected version:  "GNU ld (GNU Binutils) 2.41"
Please run Meta/serenity.sh rebuild-toolchain x86_64 to update it.
```

Run `Meta/serenity.sh rebuild-toolchain x86_64` to perform the update.

CMake might cache the compiler version in some cases and print an error even after the toolchain has been rebuilt.
If this happens, run `Meta/serenity.sh rebuild x86_64` to start over from a fresh build directory.

### GCC is missing or is outdated

Ensure your gcc version is >= 12 with `gcc --version`. Otherwise, install it. If your gcc binary is not
called `gcc` you have to specify the names of your C and C++ compiler when you run cmake, e.g.
`cmake ../.. -GNinja -DCMAKE_C_COMPILER=gcc-12 -DCMAKE_CXX_COMPILER=g++-12`.

### Legacy renegotiation is disabled

Ensure your `/etc/ssl/openssl.cnf` file has the following options:

```console
[openssl_init]
ssl_conf = ssl_sect

[ssl_sect]
system_default = system_default_sect

[system_default_sect]
MinProtocol = TLSv1.2
CipherString = DEFAULT@SECLEVEL=1
Options = UnsafeLegacyRenegotiation
```

## Running SerenityOS

### The VM is really slow

On Linux, QEMU is significantly faster if it's able to use KVM. The run script will automatically enable KVM
if `/dev/kvm` exists and is readable+writable by the current user. On Windows, ensure that you have
WHPX acceleration enabled.

### Slow boot on HiDPI systems

On some Windows systems running with >100% scaling, the booting phase of Serenity might slow to a crawl. Changing the
zoom settings of the QEMU window will speed up the emulation, but you'll have to squint harder to read the smaller display.

The default display backend (`SERENITY_QEMU_DISPLAY_BACKEND=sdl,gl=off`) does _not_ have this problem. If you're
running into this problem, make sure you haven't changed the QEMU display backend.

A quick workaround is opening the properties of the QEMU executable at `C:\Program Files\qemu\qemu-system-x86_64.exe`, and
in the Compatibility tab changing the DPI settings to force the scaling to be performed by the System, by changing the
setting at at the bottom of the window. The QEMU window will now render at normal size while retaining acceptable emulation speeds.

This is being tracked as issue [#7657](https://github.com/SerenityOS/serenity/issues/7657).

### Boot fails with "Error: Kernel Image too big for memory slot. Halting!"

This means the kernel is too large again. Contact us on the discord server or open a GitHub Issue about it.
You might want to revert latest changes in tree to see if that solves the problem temporarily.

### Boot fails with "Your computer does not support long mode (64-bit mode). Halting!"

Either your machine (if you try to boot on bare metal) is very old, thus it's not supporting x86_64
extensions, or you try to use VirtualBox without using a x64 virtualization mode or you try to use
`qemu-system-i386` which doesn't support x86_64 extensions too.

### Boot fails with "Your computer does not support PAE. Halting!"

- If booting on bare metal, your CPU is too old to boot Serenity.
- If you're using VirtualBox, you need to enable PAE/NX. Check the instructions [here.](VirtualBox.md)
- If you're using QEMU, the [CPU model configuration](https://qemu-project.gitlab.io/qemu/system/qemu-cpu-models.html) is not exposing PAE.

### Boot fails with "KVM doesn't support guest debugging"
- Update your host kernel to at least version `5.10`. This is the oldest kernel which properly supports the required KVM capability `KVM_CAP_SET_GUEST_DEBUG` (see corresponding [kernel commit](https://github.com/torvalds/linux/commit/b9b2782cd5)).
- Make sure that your distro has the qemu debug feature actually enabled (the corresponding check is [here](https://gitlab.com/qemu-project/qemu/-/blob/222059a0fccf4af3be776fe35a5ea2d6a68f9a0b/accel/kvm/kvm-all.c#L2540)).
- Or, disable KVM debugging by setting this env var when running serenity: `SERENITY_DISABLE_GDB_SOCKET=1`
